---
date: "2024-02-19"
tags: ["algebra", "math"]
title: "Abstract Algebra"
---

## Section 4 - Groups

A group \\( G \\):

1. Has an identity \\( e \\) where \\( ex = xe = x \space \forall x\in G \\)
2. Satisfies \\( \forall x \in G \\), there exists an inverse \\(x^{-1} \\) where \\( x^{-1}x = xx^{-1} = e \\)
3. Satisfies associative property \\( a(bc) = (ab)c \space \forall a, b, c \in G \\)

A group \\( \langle G, * \rangle \\) is isomorphic to another group \\( \langle H, *^\prime \rangle \\) if:

1. There is a well defined function, \\( f : G \rightarrow H \\)
2. \\( f(x * y) = f(x) *^\prime f(y) \\), the homomorphism property, is satisfied \\( \forall x, y \in G \\)
3. \\( f \\) is onto, which means if \\( y\in H \\), then there exists an \\( x\in G \\) such that \\( f(x) = y \\). It feels like finding the \\( f(y^\prime) \\) that yields \\( x \\)
4. \\( f \\) is one-to-one, which means if \\( f(x) = f(y) \\), then \\( x = y \\)

## Section 5 - Subgroups

A subset \\( H \\) is a subgroup of \\( \langle G, * \rangle \\) if:

1. \\( H \\) is also closed under \\( * \\)
2. \\( H \\) has the same identity
3. \\( \forall a\in H \\), \\( a^{-1}\in H \\) too

A cyclic subgroup \\( \langle a \rangle = \\{ a^{n} \mid n \in \mathbb{Z} \\} \\) is the smallest subgroup containing \\( a \\).

## Section 6 - Cyclic Groups

A subgroup, \\( H \\), of a cyclic group, \\( G \\), is cyclic. Sketch of proof: The empty case works, and in the non-empty case, the subgroup is going to be generated by \\( a^m \\) where \\( m \\) is the smallest integer that satisfies \\( a^m \in H \\).

If \\( G \\) is a cyclic group, if its order is infinite, it's isomorphic to \\( \langle \mathbb{Z}, + \rangle \\). The isomorphism is \\( \phi(a^i) = i \\). If its order is \\( n \\), it's isomorphic to \\( \langle \mathbb{Z}_n, +_n \rangle \\). The isomorphism is \\( \phi(a^i) = i \bmod{n} \\).

A cyclic subgroup, \\( H = \langle a^m \rangle \\), of a cyclic group, \\( G = \langle a \rangle \\), is of order \\( x = n / \gcd(n, m) \\) where \\( \vert G \vert = n \\). This is because it satisfies the smallest \\( x \\) in \\( (a^m)^x = e = a^n \\).

## Section 8 - Permutation Groups

An example of a permutation \\( \sigma \\) is
\\(
\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 \\\\
2 & 1 & 3
\end{pmatrix}
\\),
where the first element is mapped to the second, the second element is mapped to the first, and third is mapped to itself. Permutations can be composed like \\( (\sigma \sigma) (1) = \sigma (\sigma (1)) = \sigma (2) = 1 \\). The set of all permutations of any set \\( A \\) forms the symmetric group \\( S_A \\) with the composition operation. A subgroup of \\( S_A \\) is the permutation group.

The nth dihedral group \\( D_n \\) is the group of symmetries of the regular n-gon. Rotations, mirror images, and diagonal flips characterize its elements, which form a subgroup of \\( S_n \\).

Cayley's Theorem states every group is isomorphic to a permutation group. This is not the same as saying every group is isomorphic to a symmetric group, as symmetric groups contain \\( n! \\) elements and there are groups that don't contain \\( n! \\) elements, like \\( D_4 \\). The isomorphism is \\( \phi(x) : G \rightarrow S_G = \lambda_x \\), where \\( \lambda_x : G \rightarrow G = xg \space \forall g\in G \\). It means that an element in a set can be used to shuffle the set into a new permutation. Because \\( \phi(x) \\) is one-to-one and \\( \phi(xy) = \phi(x)\phi(y) \space \forall x, y \in G \\), the image of \\( G \\) under \\( \phi \\), or \\( \phi[G] = \\{ \phi(g) \mid g\in G \\} \\), is a subgroup of \\( S_G \\) and \\( \phi \\) is an isomorphism relating \\( G \\) with \\( \phi[G] \\).

## Section 9 - Orbits and Alternating Groups

The orbits are the partitions/equivalence classes of a set by a permutation. \\( a, b \in A \\) are in the same orbit if \\( a = \sigma^n (b) \\) where \\( \sigma \\) is the permutation. That is an equivalence relation (reflexive, symmetric, and transitive). An orbit of length two is a transposition and all orbits of length greater than two can be expressed as a product of transpositions.

A cycle \\( (1, 2) \\) in \\( S_3 \\) can be expressed as a permutation like
\\(
\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 \\\\
2 & 1 & 3
\end{pmatrix}
\\). Basically, interchange 1 and 2 and fix 3. Multiplying two cycles would be the composition of two permutations.

A permutation in \\( S_n \\) can either be expressed as an odd or even number of transpositions. That is, a transposition \\( (i, j) \\) multiplied with an orbit will either split the orbit if it was already part of it or join two orbits together if the transposition and the orbit were disjoint. A subgroup of \\( S_n \\) of even permutations is the alternating group \\( A_n \\).

## Section 10 - Cosets and Lagrange's Theorem

If \\( H \\) is a subgroup of \\( G \\), \\( G \\) will be divided into \\( \lvert G \rvert / \lvert H \rvert \\) disjoint partitions/subgroups/equivalence classes called cosets. The number of partitions is also known as the index \\( ( G : H ) \\). The left coset of \\( H \\) containing \\( a \\) is \\( \\{ ah \mid h \in H \\} \\).

If \\( H = 3\mathbb{Z} \\) and \\( G = \mathbb{Z} \\), the cosets would be \\( 0 + 3\mathbb{Z} = \\{0, 3, 6, ... \\} \\), \\( 1 + 3\mathbb{Z} = \\{ 1, 4, 7... \\} \\), ...

Reordering a Cayley table, grouping together elements in cosets and compressing those elements to new ones, gives rise to coset groups.

Lagrange's Theorem states the order of a subgroup \\( H \\) must be a divisor of \\( G \\). This is because every coset has the same order as \\( H \\), because \\( \phi(a) = ah \mid h \in H \\), which converts one coset into another, is one-to-one and onto.

## Section 11 - Direct Products and Finite Generated Abelian Groups

The product of groups is denoted \\( \prod_{i=1}^n G_i \\) and is the Cartesian product of groups. Elements look like \\( (g_1, g_2, ... g_n), ... \\). It also looks like \\( \oplus_{i=1}^n G_i \\) for sums. An element of a product of groups has an order which is the LCM of the individual orders.

The group \\( \mathbb{Z}\_{m} \times \mathbb{Z}\_n \\) is isomorphic to \\( \mathbb{Z}_{mn} \\) when \\( m \\) and \\( n \\) are relatively prime. Every element of \\( \mathbb{Z}_3 \\) has order \\( 3 \\). Therefore, every element of \\( \mathbb{Z}_3 \times \mathbb{Z}_3 \\) has order \\( 3 \\) too, easily seen with addition. So, \\( \mathbb{Z}_3 \times \mathbb{Z}_3 \\) cannot be cyclic because it cannot generate all \\( 9 \\) elements of the group.

The fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups is every finitely generated abelian group \\( G \\) is isomorphic to \\( \mathbb{Z}\_{{p_1}^{r_1}} \times \mathbb{Z}\_{{p_2}^{r_2}} \times ... \times \mathbb{Z}\_{{p_1}^{g_1}} \times ... \\), where \\( p_1^{r_1 + g_1} \mid \lvert G \rvert \\).

## Section 13 - Homomorphisms

Let \\( \phi : X \rightarrow Y \\), \\( A \subseteq X \\), and \\( B \subseteq Y \\). The image of \\( A \\) under \\( Y \\) is \\( \phi[A] = \\{ \phi(a) \mid a \in A \\} \\). \\( \phi[X] \\) is the range. The inverse image of \\( B \\) in \\( X \\) is \\( \phi^{-1}[B] = \\{ x\in X \mid \phi(x)\in B \\} \\).

If \\( \phi \\) were a homomorphism from group \\( G \\) to \\( G^\prime \\),

1. If \\( e \\) is \\( G \\)'s identity, \\( \phi(e) = e^\prime \\) is \\( G^\prime \\)'s identity.
2. If \\( a\in G \\), then \\( \phi(a)^{-1} = \phi(a^{-1}) \\).
3. If \\( H \\) is a subgroup of \\( G \\), \\( \phi[H] \\) is a subgroup of \\( G^\prime \\).
4. If \\( K \\) is a subgroup of \\( G^\prime \\), \\( \phi^{-1}[K] \\) is a subgroup of \\( G \\).

If \\( \phi : G \rightarrow G^\prime \\) were a homomorphism, \\( \phi^{-1}[\\{e^\prime\\}] = \\{x\in G \mid \phi(x) = e^\prime \\} \\) is the kernel of \\( \phi \\). If \\( H \\) were the kernel of \\( \phi \\), \\( \phi^{-1}[\\{\phi(g)\\}] = \\{ x\in G \mid \phi(x) = \phi(g) \\} = gH = Hg \\). With homomorphisms, opposed to isomorphisms whose kernel is singular, we need to worry about the left and right cosets of the kernel whenever thinking about inverse images. If the kernel of \\( \phi \\) were \\( \\{e\\} \\), then \\( \phi \\) is one-to-one.

Another way to show \\( \phi : G \rightarrow G^\prime \\) is an isomorphism is:
1. Show \\( \phi \\) is a homomorphism.
2. Show the kernel of \\( \phi \\) is \\( \\{e\\} \\).
3. Show \\( \phi \\) maps \\(G\\) onto \\(G^\prime\\).

A subgroup \\( H \\) of a group \\( G \\) is normal if \\( gH = Hg \space \forall g\in G \\).

## Section 14 - Factor Groups

If \\( \phi : G \rightarrow G^\prime \\) is a group homomorphism with kernel \\( H \\), then the cosets of \\( H \\) form a factor/quotient group \\( G/H \\). \\( (aH)(bH) = (ab)H \space \forall a, b \in G\\) can be derived by knowing that inverse images are related to cosets and sets with the same cardinality as a group are isomorphic. \\( \mu: G/H \rightarrow \phi[G] = \mu(aH) = \phi(a) \\) is an isomorphism and relates images to cosets.

However, \\( (aH)(bH) = (ab)H \\) does not hold if \\( H \\) is a subgroup of \\( G \\) instead of the kernel of a group homomorphism. It only holds if \\( H \\) is a normal subgroup.

If \\( H \\) is a normal subgroup of \\( G \\), then \\( \gamma(x): G \rightarrow G/H = xH \\) is a homomorphism with kernel \\( H \\). It follows that \\( \phi = \mu\gamma \\). The LHS is the image of \\( G \\) and the RHS converts \\( G \\) into a factor group and turns the factor group into the image of \\( G \\).

To classify \\( (\mathbb{Z}_4 \times \mathbb{Z}_2) / (\\{0\\} \times \mathbb{Z}_2) \\), we must find a homomorphism with kernel \\( H = (\\{0\\} \times \mathbb{Z}_2) \\). This must be the map \\( \phi: (G = \mathbb{Z}_4 \times \mathbb{Z}_2) \rightarrow ? \\) where \\( \phi(H) = \phi(e) = e^\prime \\) does not affect the identity of the new group. Well, the identity is \\( e^\prime = (0, 0) \\), so the only way \\( he^\prime \forall h \in H \\) doesn't affect its status as the identity is if we ignore the second element in the pair. Hence the map is a projective map \\( \pi_1: G \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}_4 \\).

If \\( H \\) is a normal subgroup of \\( G \\), either of these conditions apply:
1. \\( ghg^{-1} \in H \forall g\in G, h\in H \\)
2. \\( gHg^{-1} = H \forall g\in G \\)
3. \\( gH = Hg \forall g\in G \\)

An automorphism is an isomorphism of a group onto itself. The inner automorphism is \\( i_g : G \rightarrow G = i_g(x) = gxg^{-1} \forall x\in G \\).

## Section 15 - Factor Group Computations and Simple Groups

\\( \mathbb{Z} / \\{ 0 \\} \cong \mathbb{Z} \\) since there is no collapsing. \\( \mathbb{R} / n\mathbb{R} \cong \\{1\\} \\) since it is the reals, not the integers, and every real is of form \\( n\mathbb{R} \\).

Every subgroup that is half the order of the parent group is normal. The normal relation \\( gH = Hg \\) would be apparent when \\( g \\) is every element not in the subgroup.

Computing a factor group should involve:
- Expanding the kernel. This is the first coset.
- Finding an element not in the kernel and applying the operation to it. This is the second coset. Repeat for the third, etc.
- Finding an isomorphism would involve trying to find a single element/representation for the coset

A simple group is nontrivial and has no proper nontrivial normal subgroups. A maximal normal subgroup is a normal subgroup where no other normal subgroups contain it. If \\( G / M \\) is simple, then \\( M \\) is a maximal normal subgroup. The proof involves thinking about \\( \gamma \\).

The center \\( Z(G) \\) of a nonabelian group \\( G \\) is defined as \\( \\{ z\in G \mid zg = gz \forall g \in G \\} \\).

If \\( G \\) is a group, the set of all commutators \\( aba^{-1}b^{-1} \forall a, b \in G \\) generates the commutator subgroup \\( C \\) of \\( G \\), attempting to transform \\( G \\) into an abelian group by forcing abelian elements to be the identity.

\\( C \\) is a normal subgroup of \\( G \\). This is because \\( g^{-1}xg\in C \forall g\in G, c\in C \\), since \\( g^{-1}(cdc^{-1}d^{-1})g = g^{-1}cdc^{-1} \cdot gd^{-1}dg^{-1} \cdot d^{-1}g = efe^{-1}f^{-1}jkj^{-1}k^{-1} \\), where \\( e = g^{-1}c, f = d, j = d, k = g^{-1} \\).

If \\( N \\) is a normal subgroup of \\( G \\), then \\( G / N \\) is abelian iff \\( C \\) is a subgroup of \\( N \\). Saying \\( G / N \\) is abelian implies \\( (aN)(bN) = (bN)(aN) \\). This works because \\( (aN)(bN) = (ab)N = ab(b^{-1}a^{-1}ba)N = baN = (bN)(aN) \\) where \\( b^{-1}a^{-1}ba\in C \\).

## Section 16 - Group Action on a Set

If \\( X \\) is a set and \\(G\\) is a group, an action of G on X is a map \\( * : G \times X \rightarrow X = * (g, x) = g * x = gx \\) such that:

1. \\( ex = x \forall x \in X \\)
2. \\( (g_1g_2)(x) = g_1(g_2x) \forall x\in X, g_1, g_2\in G \\)

I only care about the definition for now.

## Section 18 - Rings and Fields

A ring \\( \langle R, +, \cdot \rangle \\) satisfies:

1. \\( \langle R, + \rangle \\) is an abelian group
2. Multiplication is associative
3. \\( a(b + c) = ab + ac, (a + b)c = ac + bc \forall a, b, c\in R \\)

\\( n\mathbb{Z} \\), or the cyclic group of \\(\mathbb{Z}\\) under addition, is a ring. So is \\(\mathbb{Z}_n \\), which holds the set of integers generated by the product of them modulo \\( n \\).

If a ring \\( R \\) has an additive identity \\( 0 \\), it seems ridiculously obvious that:

1. \\( 0a = a0 = 0 \\)
2. \\( a(-b) = (-a)b = -(ab) \\)
3. \\( (-a)(-b) = ab \\)

but this requires applications of the ring axioms. 2 requires the distributive property by \\( a(-b) + (ab) = 0 \implies a(-b + b) = 0 \\), 1 requires it also by \\( 0a + 0a = (0 + 0)a = 0a \implies 0a = 0 \\), and 3 requires the associative property by \\( (-a)(-b) = -(a(-b)) = -(-a(b)) = ab \\).

\\( \phi: R \rightarrow R^\prime \\) is a homomorphism from rings \\(R, R^\prime \\) if:

1. \\( \phi(a + b) = \phi(a) + \phi(b) \\)
2. \\( \phi(ab) = \phi(a)\phi(b) \\)

An evaluation homomorphism is \\( \phi_a : F \rightarrow \mathbb{R} \\), where \\( F \\) is the functions over the reals and \\( a\in\mathbb{R} \\). \\( \phi_a(f) = 0 \\) is used to find roots. The isomorphism is a homomorphism if it is one-to-one and onto.

A unity is the multiplicative identity. A unit of a ring has a multiplicative inverse. If every element of the ring has a unit, it's a division ring. If the division ring is commutative, it's a field, otherwise it's a strictly skew field. Subrings and subfields are subsets of rings and fields with the same algebraic properties.

## Section 19 - Integral Domains

Solving \\( x^2 - 5x + 6 = 0 \\) in \\( \mathbb{Z}_{12} \\) would require solving \\( x^2 - 5x + 6 = 12, x^2 - 5x + 6 = -12, ... \\).

The zero divisors of a ring are nonzero elements \\( a \\) and \\( b \\) such that \\( ab = 0 \\). In \\( \mathbb{Z}_n \\) they are the numbers that aren't relatively prime to \\( n \\), since \\( a(n/d) = 0 = n(a/d) \\) where \\( d \\) is the non-zero gcd of \\( a \\) and \\( n \\), so \\( n/d = b \\).

An integral domain \\( D \\) is a commutative ring with unity \\( 1 \neq 0 \\) which contains no zero divisors. A direct product cannot be an integral domain because it always contains zero divisors: \\( (r, 0)(0, s) \\).

Every field is an integral domain. Since every element is a unit/has a multiplicative inverse, if \\( ab = 0 \\) and \\( a \neq 0 \\), then \\( (a^{-1}a)b = 0 \implies b = 0 \\).

Every finite integral domain is a field. If you list out all the elements of the integral domain and multiply it by \\( a \\), the two sets will be the same size and none of the elements will be zero. At least one of the elements in the new set will be \\( 1 \\) so \\( a \\) has an inverse. Matrices are always in rings and not integral domains or fields since they have zero divisors.

If for a ring \\( a + a ... \\) is done \\( n \\) times, or \\( na = 0 \forall a \in R \\), then \\( n \\) is the characteristic of the ring. If there is no \\( n \\), the characteristic is \\( 0 \\).

## Section 21 - The Field of Quotients of an Integral Domain

Every integral domain can be contained in a field of quotients. If \\( D \\) is an integral domain, we can enlarge it to a field of quotients \\( F \\) via:

1. Defining what \\( F \\) looks like
2. Defining binary operations of addition and multiplication in \\( F \\)
3. Checking field axioms
4. Showing that \\( F \\) contains \\( D \\) as an integral subdomain

In 1, \\( F = \\{ (a, b) \mid a, b \in D, b \neq 0, (a, b) \sim (c, d) \iff ad = bc \\} \\).

In 2, \\( [(a, b)] + [(c, d)] = [(ad+bc, bd)] \\) and \\( [(a, b)][(c, d)] = [(ac, bd)] \\). Ensure that different elements in the same equivalence class do not change the result.

In 3, check ring axioms, commutativity for operations, and no zero divisors (every element has inverse).

In 4, check \\( i : D \rightarrow F = i(a) = [(a, 1)] \\) is an isomorphism on \\( i[D] \\).

\\( F \\) is the minimal field containing \\( D \\), and any other fields (\\( L \\)) containing \\( D \\) contain \\( F \\) by \\( \psi : F \rightarrow L = \psi(a) = a, a \in D \\). Show that with \\( \psi \\) the conditions in 1's set apply to \\( L \\), the homomorphism laws apply, and it's one-to-one.

## Section 22 - Rings of Polynomials

Let \\( R \\) be a ring. A polynomial \\( f(x) \\) with coefficients in \\( R \\) is an infinite formal sum \\( \sum_{i=0}^{\infty} a_ix^i \\) where \\( a_i \in R \\) and \\( a_i \neq 0 \\) for a finite number of values of \\( i \\). The ring \\( R \\) is a subring of the polynomial ring \\( R[x] \\). If there are two indeterminates, we denote it as \\( R[x, y] \\). The field of quotients of \\( F[x_1,...,x_n] \\) is \\( F(x_1,...,x_n) \\).

To prove \\( R[x] \\) is a ring, we have to show the homomorphism property, which requires us to derive polynomial multiplication, which can be found algorithmically through guessing patterns from examples: \\( f(x)g(x) = d_0 + d_1x + ... + d_nx^n, d_n = \sum_{i=0}^n a_ib_{n-i} \\). This assumes \\( f(x) \\) and \\( g(x) \\) have coefficients already ordered.

To prove \\( R[x] \\) is associative, we'll make sense of the same polynomial multiplication rule twice by applying it to \\( (ab)c = (abc) \\) on each side for \\( a, b, c \in R[x] \\) and collapsing the summations to a sum condition, then re-ordering the summations around again to show \\( (ab)c = a(bc) \\).

The evaluation homomorphism \\( \phi_2 : \mathbb{Q}[x] \rightarrow \mathbb{R} = \phi_2(a_0 + a_1x + ... + a_nx^n) = a_0 + a_12 + ... \\). Evaluating \\( \phi_2(x^2 + x - 6) = 2^2+2-6 = 0 \\), so the kernel contains \\(x^2+x-6\\).

## Section 23 - Factorization of Polynomials over a Field

If \\( E \\) and \\( F \\) are fields, we can find zeroes of \\( f(\alpha) = \phi_\alpha(f(x)) = g(\alpha)h(\alpha) \\) if \\( f \\) can be factored into \\( g \\) or \\( h \\). In fact, every polynomial \\( f(x) \in F[x] \\) satisfies \\( f(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) \\). If the degree of \\( r(x) \\) is just greater than that of \\( g(x) \\), just apply the division algorithm to it and keep moving it to the quotient. If \\( \alpha \in F \\) is a zero, then \\( x - \alpha \\) is a factor of \\( f(x) \in F[x] \\). An irreducible polynomial \\( f(x) \\) cannot be factored into \\( g(x)h(x) \\). Finally, the Eisenstein Criterion says that if \\( p\in Z \\) is a prime, and \\( f(x) = {a_n}^{x}+...+a_0 \in \mathbb{Z}[x] \\) with \\( a_n \neq 0 \bmod{q} \\) but \\( a_i = 0 \bmod{q} \forall i < n \\) and \\( a_0 \neq 0 \bmod{q^2} \\), then \\( f(x) \\) is irreducible over \\( \mathbb{Q} \\). This is clear after you try to factor \\( f(x) \\) into \\( g(x)h(x) \\) and you realize one of the factors cannot have factor \\( p \\), because none of the leading coefficients have \\(p\\) as a factor, only one of the constants has \\(p\\) as a factor, and the rest of the coefficients only have \\(p\\) as factors. This can be used to prove that \\(f(x)=(x^{p}-1)/(x-1)\\) is irreducible over \\(\mathbb{Q}\\) by applying \\(g(x)_{x+1}\\) to it, and the numerator after applying the binomial theorem satisfies the Eisenstein Criterion.

## Resources

<a id="1">[1]</a>
Fraleigh Abstract Algebra

<a id="2">[2]</a>
Proof of Cayley's Theorem

https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/369676/can-someone-explain-cayleys-theorem-step-by-step

<a id="3">[3]</a>
SageMath documentation to help with Section 14

https://doc.sagemath.org/html/en/thematic_tutorials/group_theory.html

<a id="4">[4]</a>
Homework solution to understand Section 11 and 14 better

https://www.maths.tcd.ie/~levene/1214/pdf/hw10sol.pdf

<a id="5">[5]</a>
Factor group intuition

https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/519182/what-is-a-good-way-to-think-of-factor-groups

<a id="6">[6]</a>
Practice problems for group theory to try

https://yutsumura.com/category/group-theory/

<a id="7">[7]</a>
Difference between Z/nZ and Z_n

https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2288438/difference-between-mathbbz-n-mathbbz-and-mathbbz-n

<a id="8">[8]</a>
Proof of the polynomial division algorithm

https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/48958/proof-of-the-polynomial-division-algorithm
